# TRS80-RS232

From what I can see, this is the most straightforward way to communicate with a TRS-80.

Notes derived from TRS-80 Model 4P Service Manual.


## Interesting TRS-80 RAM locations
| Location | Description                                      |
| -------- | ------------------------------------------------ |
| 4055H    | Boot type {1:Floppy, 2:Hard Disk, 3: ARCNET, 4: RS-232C, 5-7: Reserved} |
| 4057H    | RS-232 Baud Rate (only valid on RS-232 boot)     |


## Interesting I/O Port Assignments
| Port   | Normally Used | Out                                 | In               |
| ------ | ------------- | ----------------------------------- | ---------------- |
| E8-EB  | N/A           | RS232OUT*                           | RS232IN*         |
| E8     | E8            | UART MASTER RESET                   | MODEM STATUS     |
| E9     | E9            | BAUD RATE GEN. REG                  | (RESERVED)       |
| EA     | EA            | UART CONTROL AND MODEM CONTROL REG. | UART STATUS REG. |


## RS232OUT* (E8-EB)
* Description - UART Control, Data Control, Modem Control, Baud Rate Generator(BRG) Control
* Access - WRITE ONLY
* E8 - UART Master Reset
* E9 - BAUD Rate Gen. Register
* EA - UART Control Register (Modem Control Register)
* EB - UART Transmit Holding Register


## RS232IN* (E8-EB)
* Description - Input UART and Modem Status
* Access - READ ONLY
* E8 - Modem Status
* E9 - Reserved
* EA - UART Status Register
* EB - UART Receive Holding Register (Resets DR)


## RS-232C Circuit
| Port | Input                     | Output                                           |
| ---- | ------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------ |
| E8   | Modem status              | Master Reset, enables UART control register load |
| EA   | UART status               | UART control register load and modem control     |
| E9   | Not used                  | Baud rate register load enable bit               |
| EB   | Receiver holding register | Transmitter Holding register                     |


## RS-232C Technical Description (from service manual)
The RS-232C circuit for the Model 4P computer supports asyn­chronous serial transmissions and conforms to the 
EIA RS-232C standards at the input-output interface connector (J4). The heart of the circuit is the TR1 865 
Asynchronous Receiver/Transmitter U30. It performs the job of converting the parallel byte data from the CPU 
to a serial data stream including start, stop, and parity bits. For a more detailed description of how this 
LSI circuit performs these functions, refer to the TR1 865 datasheets and application notes. The transmit and 
receive clock rates that the TR 1 865 needs are supplied by the Baud Rate Generator U52 (BR1 941 L) or (BR1 943). 
This circuit takes the 5.0688 MHz supplied by the system timing circuit and the pro­grammed information received 
from the CPU over the data bus and divides the basic clock rate to provide two clocks. The rates available from 
the BRG go from 50 Baud to 1 9200 Baud. See the BRG table for the complete list.


Interrupts are supported in the RS-232C circuit by the Interrupt mask register (U92) and the Status register (U44) which allow
the CPU to see which kind of interrupt has occurred. Interrupts can be generated on receiver data register full, 
transmitter reg­ister empty, and any one of the errors - parity, framing, or data overrun. This allows a minimum of CPU overhead
in transfer­ring data to or from the UART. The interrupt mask register is port EO (write) and the interrupt status register 
is port EO (read).

All Model I, III, and 4 software written for the RS-232-C interface is compatible with the Model 4P RS-232-C circuit, 
provided the software does not use the sense switches to configure the in­terface. The programmer can get around this 
problem by di­rectly programming the BRG and UART for the desired configuration or by using the SETCOM command of the disk
operating system to configure the interface . The TRS-80 RS-232C Interface hardware manual has a good discussion of the
RS-232C standard and specific programming examples (Cat­alog Number 26-1 1 45).


## DB-25 Connector Pinout
| Pin | Signal                       |
| --- | ---------------------------- |
| 1   | PGND (Protective Ground)     |
| 2   | TD (Transmit Data)           |
| 3   | RD (Receive Data)            |
| 4   | RTS (Request to Send)        |
| 5   | CTS (Clear to Send)          |
| 6   | DSR (Data Set Ready)         |
| 7   | SGND (Signal Ground)         |
| 8   | CD (Carrier Detect)          |
| 19  | SRTS (Spare Request to Send) |
| 20  | DTR (Data Terminal Ready)    |
| 22  | RI (Ring Indicate)           |




# TRS-80 Model III Notes
Notes from **TRS-80 Model III Operation and BASIC Language Reference Manual**
This was a book I "inherited" from an old electrical engineer. This was an awesome reference.


## Programming the RS-232-C Interface
The Model 4P should work the same as the Model III with its RS232-C interface.


Default characteristics:
| Characteristic     | Value |
| ------------------ | ----- |
| Baud Rate          | 300   |
| Word Length (bits) | 8     |
| Parity             | None  |
| Stop Bits          | 1     |
| Wait for complete  | Yes   |


If you attempt to send a character, the computer will wait until the receiving device
is able to accept the character (same thing for receiving a character).

To regain control during this wait, hold **BREAK** until **READY** returns


## I/O to the RS-232-C Interface

Two ROM subroutines for serial I/O (use from BASIC with ```USR``` function)
* ```$RSTX``` - send a character
* ```$RSRCV``` - receive a character


Sending a character:
1. Establish serial connection to other device
2. Define USR call to $RSTX (address 85) by executing the following BASIC:
  * ```POKE 16526,85```
  * ```POKE 16527,0```
3. Send character by storing ASCII code in memory location **16880**.
  * Suppose A$ contains a character
  * ```POKE 16880,ASC(A$)```
4. Make USR call with a dummy argument
  * ```X = USR(0)```
5. Repeat until all data is sent


Receiving a character:
1. Establish serial connection to other device
2. Define USR call to $RSRCV (address 50) by executing the following BASIC:
  * ```POKE 16526,80```
  * ```POKE 16527,0```
3. Get character by making USR call with dummy argument
  * ```X = USR(0)```
  * Upon returning from subroutine, USR returns ASCII code of the character received in memory location **16872**.
  * A zero indicates that no value was received
4. To make the character available to BASIC
  * execute ```A$ = CHR$(PEEK(16872))```
  * If ```A$ = CHR$(0)``` then no character was received
5. Repeat until all data is received.



# Misc Notes

* Measured output voltage of RS232-C (IDLE)
  * 0.38v on output pins VCC-GND of HW-044 
  * 5.99v on MAX3232 on HW-044
* Measured output voltage of RS232-C (TXD)
  * 

